# Outer Join Example

The following example produces for each Member - their name, the description of the class they attend (if any) and 
the Trainer (name) for the class. This will require joining tables - gymmember, memberclass, fitnessClass and Trainer.

1. Identify which tables have the data you are looking for, member name is in the *gymmember* table, class description is in the *fitnessClass* table, and trainer name is in the *Trainer* table. The tables required are: *gymmember*, *fitnessClass*, *memberClass*, and Trainer. Since there are 4 tables, we need 3 joins. 
       
2. Identify which columns are the primary and foreign keys in these tables. We use these in the *ON* clause.
    - There are no foreign keys in *gymmember* or *fitnessClass*, so we cannot join these tables together but there are 2 foreign keys in *memberClass*, which links members to classes. 
    - To join the gymmember and memberClass tables we use *memberId*, which is the Primary key in gymmember and a foreign key in memberClass. 
    - To join the fitnessClass and memberClass tables we use *classId*, which is the Primary key in fitnessClass and a foreign key in memberClass.
    - To join the fitnessClass and Trainer tables we use *PPS*, which is the Primary key in Trainer and a foreign key in fitnessClass.	
    
3. Identify which columns we want the query to output; in this case it is *firstName*, *lastName* from the *gymmember* table, *classDescription* from the *fitnessClass* table, and *firstName*, *lastName* from the *Trainer* table. We will use these in our *SELECT*.

~~~sql
SELECT CONCAT(g.firstname, " ", g.lastName) AS Member, classDescription Class, 
       CONCAT(t.firstname, " ", t.lastName) AS Trainer
FROM gymmember g LEFT JOIN memberClass 
ON g.memberId = memberclass.memberId
LEFT JOIN fitnessClass 
ON memberclass.classId = fitnessClass.classId
LEFT JOIN trainer t 
ON fitnessClass.PPS = t.PPS
ORDER BY g.lastname, g.firstname;
~~~

OR 

~~~sql
SELECT CONCAT(g.firstname, " ", g.lastName) AS Member, classDescription Class, 
       CONCAT(t.firstname, " ", t.lastName) AS Trainer
FROM gymmember g LEFT JOIN memberClass USING (memberId)
LEFT JOIN fitnessClass USING (classId)
LEFT JOIN trainer t USING (PPS)
ORDER BY g.lastname, g.firstname;
~~~

You can write the query as follows using the RIGHT join:

~~~sql
SELECT CONCAT(g.firstname, " ", g.lastName) AS Member, classDescription Class, 
       CONCAT(t.firstname, " ", t.lastName) AS Trainer
FROM fitnessClass  
JOIN  memberClass
ON fitnessClass.classId = memberclass.classId
JOIN trainer t 
ON fitnessClass.PPS = t.PPS
RIGHT JOIN gymmember g
ON g.memberId = memberClass.memberId
ORDER BY g.lastname, g.firstname;
~~~